---
title: "Three Ways to Understand China’s Aircraft Carrier Building Spree"
source: "https://nationalinterest.org/feature/three-ways-to-understand-chinas-aircraft-carrier-building-spree-jh-060526"
author:
  - "[[James Holmes]]"
published: 2026-06-05
created: 2026-06-11
description: "Thucydides’ ancient maxim that states act because of “fear, honor, and interest” holds true for the modern-day priorities of the People’s Liberation Army Navy."
tags:
  - "clippings"
---
## Thucydides’ ancient maxim that states act because of “fear, honor, and interest” holds true for the modern-day priorities of the People’s Liberation Army Navy.

Who better to ask about Chinese aircraft carriers than a historian who lived in an age of rowboats and spears?

I refer to Thucydides, of course. In his [*History of the Peloponnesian War*](https://thelandmarkancienthistories.com/Thucydides.htm), the father of history crafts a Greek prototype for realist analysis that helps put China’s present carrier ambitions in perspective. While chronicling the protracted war between Athens and Sparta (431-404 BC), he proclaims that “three of the strongest motives” animating states’ actions are “fear, honor, and interest.” Societies must arm lest they fall victim to the supposed “law that the weaker should be subject to the stronger.” Thucydides applied this remorseless logic to the bloodletting he witnessed.

How would a historian from antiquity explain [China’s aircraft carrier ambitions](https://nationalinterest.org/blog/buzz/china-might-have-nine-aircraft-carriers-by-2035-pentagon-says-sa-020326) today? Chances are he would survey them through the prism of fear, honor, and interest. Let’s see if we can replicate his wisdom.

### A Brief History of the People’s Liberation Army Navy

Communist China has come a long way in the nautical realm. Founding Chinese Communist Party chairman [Mao Zedong](https://nationalinterest.org/tags/mao-zedong) evinced little interest in the sea. He acknowledged China would ultimately need a [powerful people’s navy](https://centerformaritimestrategy.org/publications/the-peoples-liberation-army-navy-and-the-china-dream/) to venture beyond near-shore waters, but he also pragmatically understood that China’s economy wouldn’t be able to support one anytime soon. Indeed, the People’s Liberation Army Navy ([PLA Navy](https://nationalinterest.org/tags/peoples-liberation-army-navy)) remained a sizable but essentially backward force well into the 1980s.

Mao’s mode of thinking outlived him. Even after the Great Helmsman’s demise in 1976, Chinese leaders like successor [Deng Xiaoping](https://www.asianstudies.org/publications/eaa/archives/crossing-the-river-by-feeling-the-stones-deng-xiaoping-in-the-making-of-modern-china/) contented themselves with free-riding on US maritime supremacy. Like Mao, they reasoned that it was best to spend finite resources on economic development—Deng inaugurated China’s “ [reform and opening up](https://www.geostrategy.org.uk/research/understanding-xi-jinpingsreform-and-opening-up/) ” project circa 1978—than on a big, pricey fleet. Why not entrust maritime security to the United States, so long as it chose to furnish it? Indeed, in naval as well as land-based military affairs, China punched well below its weight throughout the 1980s and 1990s, in keeping with Deng’s aphorism urging Chinese leaders to “hide your strength, bide your time.”

But with Chinese economic development came increasing reliance on the sea for imports of fuel and raw materials, to say nothing of exports of finished goods. Shipping lanes came to figure prominently in China’s foreign-policy calculus. In short, fear took hold.

### Principle #1: China Fears a US Blockade

Today, Chinese statesmen fret that the United States will hold China’s economic interests hostage during a crisis or warfare in the China seas—mounting a blockade along the first island chain and perhaps elsewhere, for instance in a key waterway such as the Strait of Hormuz. The ability to interdict crucial sea lanes bestows leverage on America and its allies.

[Xi Jinping](https://nationalinterest.org/tags/xi-jinping) & Co. have good reason to fret. The 2026 US [National Defense Strategy](https://nationalinterest.org/tags/national-defense-strategy) vows to stage a “ [denial defense](https://media.defense.gov/2026/Jan/23/2003864773/-1/-1/0/2026-NATIONAL-DEFENSE-STRATEGY.PDF) ” along the first island chain, both to preserve allied territorial integrity and to constrain China’s freedom of maritime movement. And, done correctly, denial defense may deter Beijing from misadventures. Deterrence is grounded in doubt and fear.

Anxiety that the US Navy will cut China’s economic lifelines from afar beckons Beijing’s strategic gaze irresistibly seaward. Official rhetoric captures these geopolitical anxieties. After Secretary of Defense [Pete Hegseth](https://nationalinterest.org/tags/pete-hegseth) delivered a stemwinder at last year’s Shangri-la Dialogue, for instance, the Chinese Foreign Ministry [accused him](https://thehill.com/policy/international/5328028-china-hegseth-cold-war-mentality/) of having “deliberately ignored the call for peace and development by countries in the region, and instead touted the Cold War mentality for bloc confrontation, vilified China with defamatory allegations, and falsely called China a ‘threat.’” In Chinese parlance, “Cold War mentality” is code for containment. Officialdom in China is keenly aware that the [American defense perimeter of the Pacific](https://www.cia.gov/readingroom/docs/1950-01-12.pdf) ran along the first island chain by 1950. It could do so again. Beijing has resolved not to be contained in that manner again.

Thucydides would find China’s bleak analysis instantly familiar, having found the “real cause” of the Peloponnesian War in the “growth of the power of Athens, and the alarm which this inspired in Sparta.” Although he concedes that no one talked openly about basic causes of the war, the historian maintains that fear made great-power war “inevitable.” From Beijing’s standpoint, assenting to permanent US maritime supremacy would amount to knuckling under to Thucydides’ law condemning the weak to remain subservient to the strong. No superpower could consent to such a predicament.

### Principle #2: The PLAN Honors China’s Imperial Past

Sure, the dread of what US leaders might do with overwhelming sea power helps account for China’s quest for a great navy. But it cannot explain Beijing’s determined pursuit of specific cutting-edge platforms like aircraft carriers. For insight, we look elsewhere.

Many years ago, Boston College professor [Robert Ross](https://www.bc.edu/bc-web/schools/morrissey/departments/political-science/people/faculty-directory/robert-ross.html) ascribed China’s carrier-centric naval buildup to “ [naval nationalism](http://belfercenter.ksg.harvard.edu/publication/19623/chinas_naval_nationalism.html).” In Ross’ view, high-end warships are tokens of great power that Beijing simply must possess to fulfill the destiny it covets as a seafaring civilization. Talismans like capital ships fire popular enthusiasm for nautical endeavors, and for the state that undertakes them.

And there is no question that China is on a quest to burnish its honor and renown as a seagoing state—or rather to recoup lost renown. It’s fashionable to say that China is an intrinsically continental state, but there was a time when imperial China operated the world’s largest, most technologically sophisticated fleet—Admiral Zheng He’s “treasure fleet.” During the 15th century, the iconic Ming Dynasty mariner commanded a series of “ [treasure voyages](https://www.amazon.com/When-China-Ruled-Seas-1405-1433/dp/0195112075) ” (1405–1433) through Southeast Asia and the Indian Ocean, conducting trade, diplomacy, occasional constabulary missions, and exploration. But by the end of the century, for reasons that remain somewhat obscure, Ming officialdom had ordered Zheng’s fleet broken up and forbidden further sea voyages. In an ironic twist, China’s withdrawal from the saltwater realm came at almost the same historical moment European seafarers started arriving in the region—ushering in a half-millennium of European marine mastery. The Ming maritime legacy vanished.

Fast forward to the 19th century, and the onset of China’s “ [century of humiliation](https://www.uscc.gov/sites/default/files/3.10.11Kaufman.pdf) ” at the hands of seaborne conquerors like the United Kingdom, France, Germany, and Japan. Starting with the [First Opium War](https://history.state.gov/milestones/1830-1860/china-1) (1839–1842), imperial powers defeated a decaying Qing Dynasty again and again, compelling Qing emperors to accept “unequal treaties” along with such indignities as foreign gunboats patrolling Chinese rivers. It is hard for Asia’s historic central power to stomach dismal memories like those. But it’s not just distant history. Before the inception of the aircraft carrier program, Chinese observers looked around the UN Security Council chamber and noticed that all five permanent council members except for China had carriers in their arsenals.

But it wasn’t just the permanent five one-upping China. Closer to home, even the Japan Maritime Self-Defense Force operates light carriers (known euphemistically as “ [helicopter destroyers](https://news.usni.org/2024/09/10/japans-largest-warship-headed-to-california-for-f-35b-testing) ” for political reasons). These vessels have undergone refits to operate F-35 stealth combat jets alongside their helicopter complements. [Similar vessels](https://www.usni.org/magazines/proceedings/2024/april/south-koreas-dokdo-class-amphibious-warfare-helicopter-carriers) reside in the South Korean naval inventory. Even Thailand has a [flattop](https://www.navalnews.com/naval-news/2025/11/thales-to-upgrade-ipms-of-thai-navys-htms-chakri-naruebet-aircraft-carrier/), albeit a small one.

China could simply no longer accept being outclassed in the world’s premier warships. Adding carriers to the PLA Navy fleet certified China’s arrival as a sea power of heft. Flattops are the modern-day descendants of Zheng He’s majestic treasure ships. His legacy lives again.

### Principle #3: Beijing Has an Interest in Regional Hegemony

Thucydides would smile knowingly at Beijing’s search for “face” in the marine demesne. But there’s more to the Chinese aircraft carrier program than salvaging China’s good name, keeping up with the Joneses, or even holding off fear of predation from the United States.

Think about how Beijing can use carrier task forces to uphold tangible interests. Most obviously, PLA Navy carriers now routinely sortie from the China seas through the [Ryukyu Islands](https://nationalinterest.org/tags/ryukyu-islands) or the Luzon Strait to demonstrate prowess and cow China’s Asian neighbors. And then there’s [Taiwan](https://nationalinterest.org/tags/taiwan). By threatening the island’s east coast, carrier groups further complicate the tactical plight confronting its defenders. Requiring the Taiwan Navy and Air Force to look eastward—as well as westward and skyward—further disorients them, helping the PLA set the terms of the engagement.

If victory over Taiwan were swift enough, PLA forces could prevail before the US military could intervene. Beijing would have fulfilled its [dream](https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-china-22726375) of national unification with minimal disturbance to the regional order. For China as for other naval powers, in short, aircraft carriers offer ample bang for the buck.

Or think about the [South China Sea](https://nationalinterest.org/tags/south-china-sea). Carrier groups provide a forward, mobile airfield from which to defend Chinese-held islands, the adjacent waters and skies, and the rich natural resources thought to lie in the seabed beneath. They are a useful adjunct to [gray-zone operations](https://www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/research_briefs/RBA500/RBA594-1/RAND_RBA594-1.pdf), and a backstop of last resort should some regional contestant mount effective resistance to China’s maritime militia and coast guard. And as Beijing pivots further to the southwest, carriers could form the core of a PLA Navy presence in South Asia, should Chinese leaders opt to institute an expeditionary Indian Ocean squadron. In short, flattops can perform a multitude of functions, just as they have been central to a wide variety of US naval operations since World War II.

### Aircraft Carriers Have Many General Uses, Too

Now, on fleet design. Chinese flattops need not match their US Navy counterparts on a ship-for-ship basis to achieve the party’s goals. The PLA Navy surface fleet, including the aviation contingent, is the beneficiary of dense land-based fire support. For instance, the [PLA Rocket Force](https://nationalinterest.org/tags/peoples-liberation-army-rocket-force) fields families of antiship ballistic missiles (ASBMs). These truck-launched weapons are capable of striking ships underway hundreds if not thousands of miles from Asian shores, [according to the Pentagon](https://media.defense.gov/2025/Dec/23/2003849070/-1/-1/1/ANNUAL-REPORT-TO-CONGRESS-MILITARY-AND-SECURITY-DEVELOPMENTS-INVOLVING-THE-PEOPLES-REPUBLIC-OF-CHINA-2025.PDF). Confronted with this thicket of weaponry, the US Indo-Pacific Fleet commanders may be reluctant to venture westward of Guam. And if they do accept the losses inflicted by ASBM strikes, US mariners will encounter land-based combat aircraft, quiet diesel-electric submarines, and a variety of combatant ships, all sporting long-range antiship cruise missiles. Just reaching the combat theater threatens to exact steep costs from the US joint force.

If indeed the PLA could convert the Western Pacific into no-go territory for the US Navy and affiliated joint forces, it could uphold China’s Thucydidean interests without ever risking battle with its major antagonist. And it has leisure in the realm of naval aviation. Land-based defenses and the world’s largest fleet of surface combatants—cruisers, destroyers, frigates—have granted PLA naval commanders time to train carrier pilots and learn the intricate art of operating carrier task forces. Carriers steam in company with an entourage of escorts and logistics ships. It takes time to sort through various formations, defensive screens, underway replenishment techniques, and the like. Shore defenses also give China’s navy a respite to work any engineering kinks out of the flattops themselves, build new and more ambitious carriers, and experiment with fleet tactics.

By no means is combat readiness the sole motive propelling China’s carrier ambitions. Carriers can prosecute noncombat missions that do not fit neatly into Thucydides’ trio of fear, honor, and interest. After the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami, for instance, Chinese pundits took note of how US Navy vessels transiting the afflicted region rushed to the scene to render assistance. America harvested goodwill across Southeast Asia, while China felt sidelined.

To ensure it cannot be caught flat-footed again, Beijing has already built vessels like hospital ships and amphibious transports suitable for responding to natural and humanitarian disasters. Big-deck carriers make another worthy addition to China’s disaster-relief repertoire. Non-Thucydidean errands of mercy add luster to China’s repute as a great sea power—bolstering the legitimacy of its naval enterprise, and thus indirectly advancing its national interests.

Fear, honor, interest. Thucydides: a man for all seasons.

### About the Author: James Holmes

*James Holmes is J. C. Wylie Chair of Maritime Strategy at the Naval War College and co-author of a third edition of* Red Star over the Pacific: China’s Rise and the Challenge to US Maritime Strategy*. The views voiced here are his alone.*